Update zkEVM - Edit user fees (#427)
0xPolygon/polygon-docs: docs/zkEVM/architecture/effective-gas/implement-egp-strat.md

Calculating the breakeven gas price is another measure used in the Polygon zkEVM network to mitigate possible losses.

As explained before, the computation is split in two; costs associated with data availability, and costs associated with the use of resources when transactions are processed.

#### Costs associated with data availability

The cost associated with data availability is computed as,

$$
\texttt{DataCost} \cdot \texttt{L1GasPrice}
$$

where $\texttt{DataCost}$ is the cost in gas for data stored in L1.

> The cost of data in Ethereum varies according to whether it involves zero bytes or non-zero bytes. In particular, non-zero bytes cost $16$ gas units, while zero bytes cost $4$ gas unints. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cost of data in Ethereum varies according to whether it involves zero bytes or non-zero bytes. In particular, non-zero bytes cost $16$ gas units, while zero bytes cost $4$ gas uints. 
```

> Also, recall that the computation of the cost for _non-zero bytes_ must take into account the constant data which always appear in a transaction but not included in the RLP:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, recall that the computation of the cost for _non-zero bytes_ must take into account the constant data which always appears in a transaction but is not included in the RLP:
```

- The signature, which consists of $65$ bytes.

> - The previously defined $\texttt{EffectivePercentageByte}$, which consists in a single byte. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The previously defined $\texttt{EffectivePercentageByte}$, which consists of a single byte. 
```

This results in a total of $66$ constantly present bytes.

> Taking all in consideration, $\texttt{DataCost}$ can be computed as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taking everything into consideration, $\texttt{DataCost}$ can be computed as:
```

$$
\texttt{DataCost} = (\texttt{TxConstBytes} + \texttt{TxNonZeroBytes}) \cdot \texttt{NonZeroByteGasCost} \\
+\ \texttt{TxZeroBytes} \cdot \texttt{ZeroByteGasCost}
$$

where $\texttt{TxNonZeroBytes}$ represents the count of non-zero bytes in a raw transaction, and similarly $\texttt{TxZeroBytes}$ represents the count of zero bytes in a raw transaction sent by the user.

#### Computational costs

Costs associated with transaction execution is denoted by $\texttt{ExecutionCost}$, and it is measured in gas.

> In contrast to costs for data availability, calculating computational costs necessecitates transactions to be executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast to costs for data availability, calculating computational costs requires executing transactions.
```

$$
\texttt{GasUsed} \cdot \texttt{L2GasPrice}
$$

where $\texttt{L2GasPrice}$ is obtained by multiplying $\texttt{L1GasPrice}$ by a chosen factor less than $1$,

$$
\texttt{L2GasPrice} = \texttt{L1GasPrice} \cdot \texttt{L1GasPriceFactor}
$$

In particular, we choose a factor of $0.04$.

#### Total price of a transaction

The total transaction cost is simply the sum of data availability and computational costs:

$$
\texttt{TotalTxPrice} = \big( \texttt{DataCost} \cdot \texttt{L1GasPrice} \big) + \big(\texttt{GasUsed} \cdot \texttt{L1GasPrice} \cdot \texttt{L1GasPriceFactor} \big)
$$

In order to establish the gas price at which the total transaction cost is covered, we can compute $\texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice}$ as the following ratio:

$$
\texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice} = \frac{\texttt{TotalTxPrice}}{\texttt{GasUsed}}
$$

Additionally, we incorporate a factor $\texttt{NetProfit ≥ 1}$ that allows us to achieve a slight profit margin:

$$
\texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice} = \frac{\texttt{TotalTxPrice}}{\texttt{GasUsed}} \cdot \texttt{NetProfit}
$$

We then conclude that it is financially safe to accept the transaction if

$$
\texttt{SignedGasPrice} > \texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice}.
$$

> However, a  problem arises:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, a problem arises:
```

In the RPC component, we’re only pre-executing the transaction, meaning we’re using an incorrect state root. Consequently, the $\texttt{GasUsed}$ is only an approximation.

This implies that we need to multiply the result by a chosen factor before comparing it to the signed price.

This ensures that the costs are covered in case more gas is ultimately required to execute the transaction. This factor is named $\texttt{BreakEvenFactor}$.

Now we can conclude that if

$$
\texttt{SignedGasPrice} > \texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice} \cdot \texttt{BreakEvenFactor}
$$

then it is safe to accept the transaction.

> Observe that we still need to introduce gas price prioritization, which will be covered later on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Observe that we still need to introduce gas price prioritization, which we explain later.
```

### Example (Breakeven gas price)

Recall the example proposed before, where the $\texttt{GasPriceSuggested}$ provided by RPC was $2.85$ gwei per gas, but the user ended up setting $\texttt{SignedGasPrice}$ to $3.3$.

The figure below depicts the current situation.

![Figure: Timeline current L1GasPrice](../../../img/zkEVM/timeline-current-l1gasprice.png)

> Suppose the user sends a transaction that has $200$ non-zero bytes, including the constant ones and $100$ zero bytes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose the user sends a transaction that has $200$ non-zero bytes, including the constants and $100$ zero bytes. 
```

Reviewer: I'm just wondering about "constants" this is a coding term, a noun, and you are saying "constant ones" a lot which uses the word as an adjective modifier... I think you mean "constant(s)".

Reviewer: I have updated the other one above now.

> Moreover, at the time of pre-executing the transaction, which is done without getting an out-of-counters (OOC) error, $60,000$ gas units are consumed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, on pre-executing the transaction without an out-of-counters (OOC) error, $60,000$ gas units are consumed.
```

> Recall that, since we are using a "wrong" state root, this gas is only an estimation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recall that, since we are using a "wrong" state root, this amount is only an estimation. 
```

Hence, using the previously explained formulas, the total transaction cost is:

$$
\begin{aligned}
&\texttt{TotalTxPrice} = \texttt{DataCost} \cdot \texttt{L1GasPrice} + \texttt{GasUsed} \cdot \texttt{L1GasPrice} \cdot \texttt{L1GasPriceFactor}\\
&\implies  \texttt{TotalTxPrice} = (200 · 16 + 100 · 4) · 21 + 60, 000 · 21 · 0.04 = 126, 000\ \texttt{GWei}
\end{aligned}
$$

Observe that the $21$ appearing in the substitution is the $\texttt{L1GasPrice}$ at the time of sending the transaction.

Now, we are able to compute the $\texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice}$ as:

$$
\texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice} = \frac{\texttt{TotalTxPrice}}{\texttt{GasUsed}} = \frac{126,000\ \texttt{GWei}}{60,000\ \texttt{Gas}} \cdot 1, 2  =  2.52\ \texttt{ GWei/Gas}
$$

We have introduced a $\texttt{NetProfit}$ value of $1.2$, indicating a target of a $20\%$ gain in this process. 

> At a first glance, we might conclude acceptance since:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At first glance, we might conclude the transaction has been accepted:
```

Reviewer: I don't know what you mean by "acceptance" ? of what?

$$
 \texttt{SignedGasPrice} = 3.3 > 2.52
$$

but, recall that this is only an estimation, the gas consumed with the correct state root can differ.

To avoid this, we introduce a $\texttt{BreakEvenFactor}$ of $30\%$ to account for estimation uncertainties:

$$
\texttt{SignedGasPrice} = 3.3 > 3.276 = 2.52 · 1.3 = \texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice} \cdot \texttt{BreakEvenFactor}
$$

> Consequently, we decide to accept the transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consequently, the system accepts the transaction.
```

### Example (Breakeven factor)

Suppose we disable the $\texttt{BreakEvenFactor}$ by setting it to $1$. 

Our original transaction’s pre-execution consumed $60,000$ gas:

$$
\texttt{GasUsedRPC} = 60, 000
$$

However, let's assume the correct execution at the time of sequencing consumes $35,000$ gas.

> If we recompute $\texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice}$ using this updated used gas, we get $3.6\ \texttt{GWei/Gas}$, which is way higher than the original one. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we recompute $\texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice}$ using this updated used gas, we get $3.6\ \texttt{GWei/Gas}$, which is way higher than the original estimation. 
```

That means we should have charged the user a higher gas price in order to cover the whole transaction cost, standing at $105,000\ \texttt{GWei}$.

> But, since we are accepting all the transactions that sign more than $2.85$ of gas price, we do not have any margin to increase more. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, since we are accepting all the transactions that sign more than $2.85$ of gas price, we do not have any margin to increase it. 
```

In the worst case we are losing:

$$
105, 000 − 35, 000 · 2.85 = 5,250\ \texttt{GWei}
$$

By introducing $\texttt{BreakEvenFactor}$, we are limiting the accepted transactions to the ones with,

$$
\texttt{SignedGasPrice} ≥ 3.27
$$

in order to compensate for such losses.

In this case, we have the flexibility to avoid losses and adjust both the user's and Polygon zkEVM network's benefits since:

$$
105, 000 − 35, 000 · 3.27 < 0
$$

> **Final Note**: In the above example, even though we assumed that a decrease in the $\texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice}$ is a result of executing with a correct state root, it can also decrease significantly due to a substantial reduction in $\texttt{L1GasPrice}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Final Note**: In the above example, even though we assume that a decrease in the $\texttt{BreakEvenGasPrice}$ is a result of executing with a correct state root, it can also decrease significantly due to a substantial reduction in $\texttt{L1GasPrice}$.
```
